docs/tools/web.md, before:

---
summary: "Web search + fetch tools (Brave Search API, Perplexity direct/OpenRouter, Gemini Google Search grounding)"
read_when:
  - You want to enable web_search or web_fetch
  - You need Brave Search API key setup
  - You want to use Perplexity Sonar for web search
  - You want to use Gemini with Google Search grounding
title: "Web Tools"
---

# Web tools

OpenClaw ships two lightweight web tools:

- `web_search` — Search the web via Brave Search API (default), Perplexity Sonar, or Gemini with Google Search grounding.
- `web_fetch` — HTTP fetch + readable extraction (HTML → markdown/text).

These are **not** browser automation. For JS-heavy sites or logins, use the
[Browser tool](/tools/browser).

## How it works

- `web_search` calls your configured provider and returns results.
  - **Brave** (default): returns structured results (title, URL, snippet).
  - **Perplexity**: returns AI-synthesized answers with citations from real-time web search.
  - **Gemini**: returns AI-synthesized answers grounded in Google Search with citations.
- Results are cached by query for 15 minutes (configurable).
- `web_fetch` does a plain HTTP GET and extracts readable content
  (HTML → markdown/text). It does **not** execute JavaScript.
- `web_fetch` is enabled by default (unless explicitly disabled).

## Choosing a search provider

| Provider            | Pros                                         | Cons                                     | API Key                                      |
| ------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| **Brave** (default) | Fast, structured results, free tier          | Traditional search results               | `BRAVE_API_KEY`                              |
| **Perplexity**      | AI-synthesized answers, citations, real-time | Requires Perplexity or OpenRouter access | `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` |
| **Gemini**          | Google Search grounding, AI-synthesized      | Requires Gemini API key                  | `GEMINI_API_KEY`                             |

See [Brave Search setup](/brave-search) and [Perplexity Sonar](/perplexity) for provider-specific details.

### Auto-detection

If no `provider` is explicitly set, OpenClaw auto-detects which provider to use based on available API keys, checking in this order:

1. **Brave** — `BRAVE_API_KEY` env var or `search.apiKey` config
2. **Gemini** — `GEMINI_API_KEY` env var or `search.gemini.apiKey` config
3. **Perplexity** — `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` / `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` env var or `search.perplexity.apiKey` config
4. **Grok** — `XAI_API_KEY` env var or `search.grok.apiKey` config

If no keys are found, it falls back to Brave (you'll get a missing-key error prompting you to configure one).

### Explicit provider

Set the provider in config:

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "brave", // or "perplexity" or "gemini"
      },
    },
  },
}
```

Example: switch to Perplexity Sonar (direct API):

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          apiKey: "pplx-...",
          baseUrl: "https://api.perplexity.ai",
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Getting a Brave API key

1. Create a Brave Search API account at [https://brave.com/search/api/](https://brave.com/search/api/)
2. In the dashboard, choose the **Data for Search** plan (not “Data for AI”) and generate an API key.
3. Run `openclaw configure --section web` to store the key in config (recommended), or set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in your environment.

Brave provides a free tier plus paid plans; check the Brave API portal for the
current limits and pricing.

### Where to set the key (recommended)

**Recommended:** run `openclaw configure --section web`. It stores the key in
`~/.openclaw/openclaw.json` under `tools.web.search.apiKey`.

**Environment alternative:** set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in the Gateway process
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env` (or your
service environment). See [Env vars](/help/faq#how-does-openclaw-load-environment-variables).

## Using Perplexity (direct or via OpenRouter)

Perplexity Sonar models have built-in web search capabilities and return AI-synthesized
answers with citations. You can use them via OpenRouter (no credit card required - supports
crypto/prepaid).

### Getting an OpenRouter API key

1. Create an account at [https://openrouter.ai/](https://openrouter.ai/)
2. Add credits (supports crypto, prepaid, or credit card)
3. Generate an API key in your account settings

### Setting up Perplexity search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          // API key (optional if OPENROUTER_API_KEY or PERPLEXITY_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "sk-or-v1-...",
          // Base URL (key-aware default if omitted)
          baseUrl: "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1",
          // Model (defaults to perplexity/sonar-pro)
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` in the Gateway
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env`.

If no base URL is set, OpenClaw chooses a default based on the API key source:

- `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` or `pplx-...` → `https://api.perplexity.ai`
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `sk-or-...` → `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- Unknown key formats → OpenRouter (safe fallback)

### Available Perplexity models

| Model                            | Description                          | Best for          |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ----------------- |
| `perplexity/sonar`               | Fast Q&A with web search             | Quick lookups     |
| `perplexity/sonar-pro` (default) | Multi-step reasoning with web search | Complex questions |
| `perplexity/sonar-reasoning-pro` | Chain-of-thought analysis            | Deep research     |

## Using Gemini (Google Search grounding)

Gemini models support built-in [Google Search grounding](https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/grounding),
which returns AI-synthesized answers backed by live Google Search results with citations.

### Getting a Gemini API key

1. Go to [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/apikey)
2. Create an API key
3. Set `GEMINI_API_KEY` in the Gateway environment, or configure `tools.web.search.gemini.apiKey`

### Setting up Gemini search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "gemini",
        gemini: {
          // API key (optional if GEMINI_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "AIza...",
          // Model (defaults to "gemini-2.5-flash")
          model: "gemini-2.5-flash",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `GEMINI_API_KEY` in the Gateway environment.
For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env`.

### Notes

- Citation URLs from Gemini grounding are automatically resolved from Google's
  redirect URLs to direct URLs.
- Redirect resolution uses the SSRF guard path (HEAD + redirect checks + http/https validation) before returning the final citation URL.
- This redirect resolver follows the trusted-network model (private/internal networks allowed by default) to match Gateway operator trust assumptions.
- The default model (`gemini-2.5-flash`) is fast and cost-effective.
  Any Gemini model that supports grounding can be used.

## web_search

Search the web using your configured provider.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.search.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- API key for your chosen provider:
  - **Brave**: `BRAVE_API_KEY` or `tools.web.search.apiKey`
  - **Perplexity**: `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY`, or `tools.web.search.perplexity.apiKey`

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "BRAVE_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if BRAVE_API_KEY is set
        maxResults: 5,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
      },
    },
  },
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from config)
- `country` (optional): 2-letter country code for region-specific results (e.g., "DE", "US", "ALL"). If omitted, Brave chooses its default region.
- `search_lang` (optional): ISO language code for search results (e.g., "de", "en", "fr")
- `ui_lang` (optional): ISO language code for UI elements
- `freshness` (optional): filter by discovery time
  - Brave: `pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`, or `YYYY-MM-DDtoYYYY-MM-DD`
  - Perplexity: `pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`

**Examples:**

```javascript
// German-specific search
await web_search({
  query: "TV online schauen",
  count: 10,
  country: "DE",
  search_lang: "de",
});

// French search with French UI
await web_search({
  query: "actualités",
  country: "FR",
  search_lang: "fr",
  ui_lang: "fr",
});

// Recent results (past week)
await web_search({
  query: "TMBG interview",
  freshness: "pw",
});
```

## web_fetch

Fetch a URL and extract readable content.

### web_fetch requirements

- `tools.web.fetch.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- Optional Firecrawl fallback: set `tools.web.fetch.firecrawl.apiKey` or `FIRECRAWL_API_KEY`.

### web_fetch config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      fetch: {
        enabled: true,
        maxChars: 50000,
        maxCharsCap: 50000,
        maxResponseBytes: 2000000,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
        maxRedirects: 3,
        userAgent: "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 14_7_2) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/122.0.0.0 Safari/537.36",
        readability: true,
        firecrawl: {
          enabled: true,
          apiKey: "FIRECRAWL_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if FIRECRAWL_API_KEY is set
          baseUrl: "https://api.firecrawl.dev",
          onlyMainContent: true,
          maxAgeMs: 86400000, // ms (1 day)
          timeoutSeconds: 60,
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

### web_fetch tool parameters

- `url` (required, http/https only)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:

- `web_fetch` uses Readability (main-content extraction) first, then Firecrawl (if configured). If both fail, the tool returns an error.
- Firecrawl requests use bot-circumvention mode and cache results by default.
- `web_fetch` sends a Chrome-like User-Agent and `Accept-Language` by default; override `userAgent` if needed.
- `web_fetch` blocks private/internal hostnames and re-checks redirects (limit with `maxRedirects`).
- `maxChars` is clamped to `tools.web.fetch.maxCharsCap`.
- `web_fetch` caps the downloaded response body size to `tools.web.fetch.maxResponseBytes` before parsing; oversized responses are truncated and include a warning.
- `web_fetch` is best-effort extraction; some sites will need the browser tool.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for key setup and service details.
- Responses are cached (default 15 minutes) to reduce repeated fetches.
- If you use tool profiles/allowlists, add `web_search`/`web_fetch` or `group:web`.
- If the Brave key is missing, `web_search` returns a short setup hint with a docs link.

Commit message:

fix(security): block private-network web_search citation redirects

docs/tools/web.md, after:

---
summary: "Web search + fetch tools (Brave Search API, Perplexity direct/OpenRouter, Gemini Google Search grounding)"
read_when:
  - You want to enable web_search or web_fetch
  - You need Brave Search API key setup
  - You want to use Perplexity Sonar for web search
  - You want to use Gemini with Google Search grounding
title: "Web Tools"
---

# Web tools

OpenClaw ships two lightweight web tools:

- `web_search` — Search the web via Brave Search API (default), Perplexity Sonar, or Gemini with Google Search grounding.
- `web_fetch` — HTTP fetch + readable extraction (HTML → markdown/text).

These are **not** browser automation. For JS-heavy sites or logins, use the
[Browser tool](/tools/browser).

## How it works

- `web_search` calls your configured provider and returns results.
  - **Brave** (default): returns structured results (title, URL, snippet).
  - **Perplexity**: returns AI-synthesized answers with citations from real-time web search.
  - **Gemini**: returns AI-synthesized answers grounded in Google Search with citations.
- Results are cached by query for 15 minutes (configurable).
- `web_fetch` does a plain HTTP GET and extracts readable content
  (HTML → markdown/text). It does **not** execute JavaScript.
- `web_fetch` is enabled by default (unless explicitly disabled).

## Choosing a search provider

| Provider            | Pros                                         | Cons                                     | API Key                                      |
| ------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| **Brave** (default) | Fast, structured results, free tier          | Traditional search results               | `BRAVE_API_KEY`                              |
| **Perplexity**      | AI-synthesized answers, citations, real-time | Requires Perplexity or OpenRouter access | `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` |
| **Gemini**          | Google Search grounding, AI-synthesized      | Requires Gemini API key                  | `GEMINI_API_KEY`                             |

See [Brave Search setup](/brave-search) and [Perplexity Sonar](/perplexity) for provider-specific details.

### Auto-detection

If no `provider` is explicitly set, OpenClaw auto-detects which provider to use based on available API keys, checking in this order:

1. **Brave** — `BRAVE_API_KEY` env var or `search.apiKey` config
2. **Gemini** — `GEMINI_API_KEY` env var or `search.gemini.apiKey` config
3. **Perplexity** — `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` / `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` env var or `search.perplexity.apiKey` config
4. **Grok** — `XAI_API_KEY` env var or `search.grok.apiKey` config

If no keys are found, it falls back to Brave (you'll get a missing-key error prompting you to configure one).

### Explicit provider

Set the provider in config:

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "brave", // or "perplexity" or "gemini"
      },
    },
  },
}
```

Example: switch to Perplexity Sonar (direct API):

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          apiKey: "pplx-...",
          baseUrl: "https://api.perplexity.ai",
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

## Getting a Brave API key

1. Create a Brave Search API account at [https://brave.com/search/api/](https://brave.com/search/api/)
2. In the dashboard, choose the **Data for Search** plan (not “Data for AI”) and generate an API key.
3. Run `openclaw configure --section web` to store the key in config (recommended), or set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in your environment.

Brave provides a free tier plus paid plans; check the Brave API portal for the
current limits and pricing.

### Where to set the key (recommended)

**Recommended:** run `openclaw configure --section web`. It stores the key in
`~/.openclaw/openclaw.json` under `tools.web.search.apiKey`.

**Environment alternative:** set `BRAVE_API_KEY` in the Gateway process
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env` (or your
service environment). See [Env vars](/help/faq#how-does-openclaw-load-environment-variables).

## Using Perplexity (direct or via OpenRouter)

Perplexity Sonar models have built-in web search capabilities and return AI-synthesized
answers with citations. You can use them via OpenRouter (no credit card required - supports
crypto/prepaid).

### Getting an OpenRouter API key

1. Create an account at [https://openrouter.ai/](https://openrouter.ai/)
2. Add credits (supports crypto, prepaid, or credit card)
3. Generate an API key in your account settings

### Setting up Perplexity search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        provider: "perplexity",
        perplexity: {
          // API key (optional if OPENROUTER_API_KEY or PERPLEXITY_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "sk-or-v1-...",
          // Base URL (key-aware default if omitted)
          baseUrl: "https://openrouter.ai/api/v1",
          // Model (defaults to perplexity/sonar-pro)
          model: "perplexity/sonar-pro",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` in the Gateway
environment. For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env`.

If no base URL is set, OpenClaw chooses a default based on the API key source:

- `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY` or `pplx-...` → `https://api.perplexity.ai`
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` or `sk-or-...` → `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- Unknown key formats → OpenRouter (safe fallback)

### Available Perplexity models

| Model                            | Description                          | Best for          |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ----------------- |
| `perplexity/sonar`               | Fast Q&A with web search             | Quick lookups     |
| `perplexity/sonar-pro` (default) | Multi-step reasoning with web search | Complex questions |
| `perplexity/sonar-reasoning-pro` | Chain-of-thought analysis            | Deep research     |

## Using Gemini (Google Search grounding)

Gemini models support built-in [Google Search grounding](https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/grounding),
which returns AI-synthesized answers backed by live Google Search results with citations.

### Getting a Gemini API key

1. Go to [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/apikey)
2. Create an API key
3. Set `GEMINI_API_KEY` in the Gateway environment, or configure `tools.web.search.gemini.apiKey`

### Setting up Gemini search

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        provider: "gemini",
        gemini: {
          // API key (optional if GEMINI_API_KEY is set)
          apiKey: "AIza...",
          // Model (defaults to "gemini-2.5-flash")
          model: "gemini-2.5-flash",
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

**Environment alternative:** set `GEMINI_API_KEY` in the Gateway environment.
For a gateway install, put it in `~/.openclaw/.env`.

### Notes

- Citation URLs from Gemini grounding are automatically resolved from Google's
  redirect URLs to direct URLs.
- Redirect resolution uses the SSRF guard path (HEAD + redirect checks + http/https validation) before returning the final citation URL.
- Redirect resolution uses strict SSRF defaults, so redirects to private/internal targets are blocked.
- The default model (`gemini-2.5-flash`) is fast and cost-effective.
  Any Gemini model that supports grounding can be used.

## web_search

Search the web using your configured provider.

### Requirements

- `tools.web.search.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- API key for your chosen provider:
  - **Brave**: `BRAVE_API_KEY` or `tools.web.search.apiKey`
  - **Perplexity**: `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `PERPLEXITY_API_KEY`, or `tools.web.search.perplexity.apiKey`

### Config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      search: {
        enabled: true,
        apiKey: "BRAVE_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if BRAVE_API_KEY is set
        maxResults: 5,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
      },
    },
  },
}
```

### Tool parameters

- `query` (required)
- `count` (1–10; default from config)
- `country` (optional): 2-letter country code for region-specific results (e.g., "DE", "US", "ALL"). If omitted, Brave chooses its default region.
- `search_lang` (optional): ISO language code for search results (e.g., "de", "en", "fr")
- `ui_lang` (optional): ISO language code for UI elements
- `freshness` (optional): filter by discovery time
  - Brave: `pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`, or `YYYY-MM-DDtoYYYY-MM-DD`
  - Perplexity: `pd`, `pw`, `pm`, `py`

**Examples:**

```javascript
// German-specific search
await web_search({
  query: "TV online schauen",
  count: 10,
  country: "DE",
  search_lang: "de",
});

// French search with French UI
await web_search({
  query: "actualités",
  country: "FR",
  search_lang: "fr",
  ui_lang: "fr",
});

// Recent results (past week)
await web_search({
  query: "TMBG interview",
  freshness: "pw",
});
```

## web_fetch

Fetch a URL and extract readable content.

### web_fetch requirements

- `tools.web.fetch.enabled` must not be `false` (default: enabled)
- Optional Firecrawl fallback: set `tools.web.fetch.firecrawl.apiKey` or `FIRECRAWL_API_KEY`.

### web_fetch config

```json5
{
  tools: {
    web: {
      fetch: {
        enabled: true,
        maxChars: 50000,
        maxCharsCap: 50000,
        maxResponseBytes: 2000000,
        timeoutSeconds: 30,
        cacheTtlMinutes: 15,
        maxRedirects: 3,
        userAgent: "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 14_7_2) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/122.0.0.0 Safari/537.36",
        readability: true,
        firecrawl: {
          enabled: true,
          apiKey: "FIRECRAWL_API_KEY_HERE", // optional if FIRECRAWL_API_KEY is set
          baseUrl: "https://api.firecrawl.dev",
          onlyMainContent: true,
          maxAgeMs: 86400000, // ms (1 day)
          timeoutSeconds: 60,
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

### web_fetch tool parameters

- `url` (required, http/https only)
- `extractMode` (`markdown` | `text`)
- `maxChars` (truncate long pages)

Notes:

- `web_fetch` uses Readability (main-content extraction) first, then Firecrawl (if configured). If both fail, the tool returns an error.
- Firecrawl requests use bot-circumvention mode and cache results by default.
- `web_fetch` sends a Chrome-like User-Agent and `Accept-Language` by default; override `userAgent` if needed.
- `web_fetch` blocks private/internal hostnames and re-checks redirects (limit with `maxRedirects`).
- `maxChars` is clamped to `tools.web.fetch.maxCharsCap`.
- `web_fetch` caps the downloaded response body size to `tools.web.fetch.maxResponseBytes` before parsing; oversized responses are truncated and include a warning.
- `web_fetch` is best-effort extraction; some sites will need the browser tool.
- See [Firecrawl](/tools/firecrawl) for key setup and service details.
- Responses are cached (default 15 minutes) to reduce repeated fetches.
- If you use tool profiles/allowlists, add `web_search`/`web_fetch` or `group:web`.
- If the Brave key is missing, `web_search` returns a short setup hint with a docs link.
